---
title: ColorCode Reboot
date: 2022-04-15
category: web
tags: mentoring coding
---
## ColorCode Reboot

I've been thinking a lot about how to help other people get started in tech,
especially as coders.  I've been living in South Africa since 2015 and the
country has many economic and financial challenges.  Without going into the hows
and whys, my understanding is that one of the biggest issues facing the country
is youth unemployment which in some places is as high as 50%. Given that South
Africa has a "young" population, I've read that the median age as of 2020 was 28
years old, addressing youth unemployment feels like a critical activity.

### ColorCode pre-pandemic

Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, I was living in Cape Town and volunteering with
an organization called ColorCode.  Roughly twice a month, we would meet at
Greenpoint Co-working in the Cape Town foreshore.  The owner of Greepoint
Co-working very generously let us use the space for free, a couple of Saturday
mornings a month. Greenpoint had a great meeting space, a lovely kitchen with
free coffee, and most importantly of all, reliable high-speed internet.

It was a lovely little community and we had a pretty solid group of students who
attended on a regular basis. There would usually be 2-3 experienced coders on
hand to help people either get started in coding or if they had attended a few
sessions, we would coach them in more advanced material.  More than a few people
came to make use of the opportunity to discuss challenges they were facing in
their nascent professional careers in coding.

Of course, the pandemic that started in March 2020 brought all of this to a
crashing halt.

And so it has been for the past 2 years.

## Remote learning

I think that the past 2 years have been many things, but one thing is for
certain: we have demonstrated without a shadow of a doubt that we can work,
interact, and most importantly, learn in so-called remote settings. This has
been especially true in tech and even more so for coders.

Coders had already been using asynchronous and remote-friendly technologies to
work, socialize, and exchange information before the pandemic. We were an
industry perfectly suited to leverage the change. In fact, for many of us, the
difference was more of a degree than in kind.

Since the beginning of this year, I have been ruminating on why can't we get
ColorCode going again using remote-friendly technologies? There has been
interest here and there from former students and the occasional discussion about
it amongst the volunteers.

I think part of the issue was that with the advent of the pandemic and the
lockdowns that came about, especially in South Africa, people were simply
focused on making their way through the economic crisis that ensued. Part of it
may have been concerns that the things that made ColorCode successful as an
in-person gathering couldn't be replicated online.

But I think that we have to accept that even with a diminuation of the disease
in our midst, we are all still vulnerable to one degree or another to it.
COVID-19 remains a highly contagious disease and while vaccination provides
considerable protection against it, it is not a complete prophylactic. Gathering
with people who are "outside" your bubble in an enclosed setting still feels a
bit risky. I am hopeful that, in time, we will be able to do this with more
confidence.

Despite all of this, it feels that we must figure out a way forward that allows
us to introduce and mentor people who want to learn coding and find out if it is
something that they can use to improve their financial and economic existence.

After all, if tech provides a way forward for people to find work even in the
midst of pandemic, surely it is even more important to help people to that
on-ramp to our field?

## Next steps

I can't claim to have all the right ideas yet on how to make this happen.
Clearly there are technologies and platforms such as Zoom that have enabled
remote learning. But those technologies depend upon the participants having
access to solid, high-speed internet. That is not a given in South Africa
although prices are coming down. There is also hope on the mobile internet front
with more spectrum being allocated to digital services in the country.

Assuming that we can solve the connectivity issues in one way or another, then
there is challenge of how to achieve a satisfying level of engagement. Helping
someone to learn an unfamiliar subject in an in-person setting is challenging
already - doing this remotely can be even more challenging.  Simple discussions
like, "Show me what's on your screen", suddenly become doubly difficult if the
other person can't show you.

But again, I think the pay-off is worth the effort. Clearly other organizations
are tackling these issues and I think that as someone who has benefited so much
from working in this field, it behooves me to figure it out.
